Initial compiler documentation (#52)
paritytech/contract-docs: docs/revive_compiler/differences_yul_translation.md

---
sidebar_position: 4
---

# Differences in YUL IR translation
This section highlights some potentially observable differences in the [YUL EVM dialect](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/yul.html#evm-dialect) translation compared to Ethereum Solidity.

Solidity developers deploying dApps to [`pallet-revive`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/tree/master/substrate/frame/revive) ought to read and understand this section well.

:::tip

For a high level overview about the differences in the overall runtime architecture, please refer first to the [Differences to Ethereum](../differences_to_eth.md) chapter.

:::

## Deploy code vs. runtime code
Our contract runtime does not differentiate between runtime code and deploy (constructor) code. Instead, both are emitted into a single PVM contract code blob and live on-chain. Therefor, in EVM termonology, the deploy code equals the runtime code (with the exception that in constructor code, the `codesize` can be larger, since the constructor arguments account to the code size too).

> 

Reviewer: > with the exception that in constructor code, the `codesize` can be larger, since the constructor arguments account to the code size too

codesize is an ethereum reference here, I don't fully get this sentence

Author: I wanted to say if you call `codesize` in the constructor you get a different value than in runtime code, because despite the code being the same, `codesize` will account for the arguments as well. I'm going to rephrase it thanks!

## YUL functions
The below list contains noteworthy differences in the translation of YUL functions.

:::note

Many functions receive memory buffer offset pointer or size arguments. Since the PVM pointer size is 32 bit, supplying memory offset or buffer size values above `2^32-1` will trap the contract immediatly.

The `solc` compiler ought to always emit valid memory references, so Solidity dApp authors don't need to worry about this unless they deal with low level `assembly` code.

:::

### `mload`, `mstore`, `msize`, `mcopy` (memory related functions) 
In general, revive preserves the memory layout, meaning low level memory operations are supported. However, a few caveats apply:
- The EVM linear heap memory is emulated using a fixed byte buffer of 64kb. This implies that the maximum memory a contract can use is limited to 64kbit (on Ethereum, contract memory is capped by gas and therefor variable).

> - Thus, accessing memory offsets larger than the fixed buffer size will trap the contract at runtime with `OutOfBound` erros.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Thus, accessing memory offsets larger than the fixed buffer size will trap the contract at runtime with an `OutOfBound` error.
```

- The compiler might detect and optimize unused memory reads and writes, leading to a different `msize` compared to what the EVM would see. 

### `calldataload`, `calldatacopy`
In the constructor code, the offset is ignored and this always returns `0`.

### `codecopy`
Only supported in constructor code.

### `invalid`
Traps the contract but does not consume the remaining gas.

### `call`, `delegatecall`, `staticall`
Calls ignore the supplied gas limit (if any) but forward all remaining resources.
The reason is multifold, see [Differences to Ethereum](../differences_to_eth.md) (section `Cross-Contract Call Gas Limit`).

Contract authors are strongly advised to [protect against re-entrancy attacks](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/security-considerations.html#reentrancy).

:::warning

> The `solc` compiler supplies a gas stipend of `2300` to calls resulting from `address payable.{send,transfer}`. Which means: The resource limits solc injects for balance transfer calls will be ignored and not protect against re-entrancy attacks.

Reviewer: ha you mean that in Ethereum you are limited in what you can do here
```
contract Receiver {
    receive() external payable {
        // Limited to 2300 gas, prevent from performing re-entrency attacks
    }
}
```

Author: Exactly

Note: Using `address payable.{send,transfer}` [is considered deprecated since a long time ago](https://diligence.consensys.io/blog/2019/09/stop-using-soliditys-transfer-now/) anyways. There is a revive pre-compile planned for making safe balance transfers.

:::

### `create`, `create2`
Deployments on revive work different than on EVM, see also [Differences to Ethereum](../differences_to_eth.md) (section `PolkaVM instead of EVM`). In a nutshell: Instead of supplying the deploy code concatenated with the constructor arguments (the EVM deploy model), the [revive runtime expects two pointers](https://docs.rs/pallet-revive/latest/pallet_revive/trait.SyscallDoc.html#tymethod.instantiate):
1. A buffer containing the code hash to deploy.
2. The constructor arguments buffer.

To make the `new` keyword in Solidity work seamlessly, `revive` translates the `dataoffset` and `datasize` instructions so that they assume the contract hash instead of the contract code. The hash is always of constant size. Thus, `revive` is able to supply the expected code hash and constructor arguments pointer to the runtime. 

> 

Reviewer: maybe a sample solidity example here would help

Author: I hope Solidity devs reading this would know about contract instantiation :see_no_evil:  Or do you mean a broken example?

:::warning

> This might fall apart in code creating contracts inside `assembly` blocks. **We strongly discourage using the `create` family opcodes to manually craft deployments in `assembly` blocks!** Usually, the reason for using `assmebly` blocks is to save gas, which is futile on revive anyways due to lower transaction costs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This might fall apart in code creating contracts inside `assembly` blocks. **We strongly discourage using the `create` family opcodes to manually craft deployments in `assembly` blocks!** Usually, the reason for using `assembly` blocks is to save gas, which is futile on revive anyways due to lower transaction costs.
```
